What is Node.js?
Node.js is an open-source, cross-platform runtime environment for executing JavaScript code outside the browser. Built on Chrome's V8 JavaScript engine, it enables developers to use JavaScript for server-side programming, revolutionizing web development.


Key Features of Node.js

JavaScript Runtime: Run JavaScript code outside the browser.
Non-Blocking I/O: Handles multiple requests efficiently.
Package Manager (npm): Access thousands of reusable libraries.
Asynchronous and Event-Driven: Non-blocking I/O operations.
Fast Execution: Built on Google Chrome’s V8 engine.
Single-threaded but Highly Scalable: Uses event loop and callbacks.
No Buffering: Processes data in chunks.
Cross-platform: Can run on Windows, Linux, and macOS




What is the difference between Node.js and JavaScript?
Answer:

JavaScript: Runs in the browser, mainly used for frontend.
Node.js: Runs on the server, used for backend development.
Node.js extends JavaScript capabilities with built-in modules like fs, http, etc.



What is npm?
Answer:
NPM stands for Node Package Manager. It is the default package manager for Node.js used to install, update, and manage external modules or libraries.


What are modules in Node.js?
Answer:
Modules in Node.js are reusable blocks of code. There are three types:
Core Modules (like http, fs)
Local Modules (user-defined files)
Third-party/npm Modules (installed via npm, like express)



What is the purpose of package.json?
Answer:

Holds metadata about the project.
Lists dependencies.
Contains scripts like start, test, etc.
Defines project name, version, and main file.







What is Node.js?
Node.js is an open-source, cross-platform runtime environment for executing JavaScript code outside the browser. Built on Chrome's V8 JavaScript engine, it enables developers to use JavaScript for server-side programming, revolutionizing web development.

🔑 Key Features of Node.js
JavaScript Runtime: Run JS outside the browser.

Non-Blocking I/O: Handles concurrent requests efficiently.

Package Manager (npm): Thousands of libraries available.

Asynchronous & Event-Driven: Efficient request handling.

Fast Execution: Powered by V8 engine.

Single-threaded & Scalable: Event loop architecture.

No Buffering: Streams data in chunks.

Cross-platform: Supports Windows, Linux, macOS.

📙 Node.js Core Q&A
1. What is the difference between Node.js and JavaScript?

JavaScript runs in browsers (frontend).

Node.js runs on servers (backend).

Node.js adds modules like fs, http.

2. What is npm?
npm (Node Package Manager) is the default manager for Node.js packages. It helps install, update, and manage libraries.

3. What are modules in Node.js?
Reusable blocks of code.
Types:

Core Modules (e.g. fs, http)

Local Modules (user-defined)

Third-party Modules (via npm like express)

4. What is package.json?
It’s the metadata file for a Node.js project.
Contains:

Project info (name, version)

Dependencies

Scripts

Entry point (e.g. index.js)

5. What is the event loop in Node.js?
It enables non-blocking I/O by offloading tasks to the OS or a thread pool, then continues execution using events and callbacks.

6. What is callback hell? How to avoid it?
Nested callbacks make code unreadable.
Avoid using:

Promises

Async/Await

7. What is a buffer in Node.js?
Used to handle binary data, especially in file systems or streams.

8. How is concurrency handled in Node.js?
Node.js uses a single-threaded model with an event loop for concurrency. I/O is offloaded to the OS, and callbacks are queued.






express js



Express is the most popular Node.js web framework, and is the underlying library for a number of other popular Node.js frameworks. It provides mechanisms to:

Write handlers for requests with different HTTP verbs at different URL paths (routes).
Integrate with "view" rendering engines in order to generate responses by inserting data into templates.
Set common web application settings like the port to use for connecting, and the location of templates that are used for rendering the response.
Add additional request processing "middleware" at any point within the request handling pipeline.





Express.js is a fast, unopinionated, and minimalist web framework for Node.js.
It simplifies routing, middleware management, and API handling.
Used for building web applications and REST APIs.



npm install express



const express = require('express');
const app = express();

app.get('/', (req, res) => {
    res.send('Hello, Express!');
});

app.listen(3000, () => {
    console.log('Server is running on port 3000');
});



1. What is Express.js?
Express.js is a web framework for Node.js used to build web applications and RESTful APIs.
2. How does Express.js differ from Node.js?
Node.js is a runtime environment that executes JavaScript.
Express.js is a framework built on Node.js that simplifies web development.
3. What is middleware in Express.js?
Middleware functions in Express process request objects before sending responses.
4. Explain routing in Express.js.
Routing refers to defining URL paths and handling HTTP requests (GET, POST, PUT, DELETE).
5.  What is CORS, and how do you enable it in Express?
CORS (Cross-Origin Resource Sharing) allows requests from different origins.
Enable using the cors package.

